Docs/initial documentation (#1)
GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-se-deployment-notes: README.md

# Deployment of GDI starter kit

> This repo is a collection of scripts and documentation, produced during the deployment of the GDI starter kit in the Swedish node. However, it shouldn't be used as a standalone guide and it probably lacks some steps, which were not documented during the deployment.

Reviewer: Spell out "repository", and minor other changes.

```suggestion
This repository is a collection of scripts and documentation produced during the deployment of the GDI starter kit in the Swedish node. However, it shouldn't be used as a standalone guide, and it probably lacks some steps not documented during the deployment.
```

The deployment described here was done in one VM (virtual machine) and the services were deployed in docker containers. The VM is running behind an ha-proxy, which was used to route the traffic to the different services. The VM is running Ubuntu 22.04 LTS.

## Repos in the deployment

> The repos used in the deployment are the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The repositories used in the deployment are the following:
```

1. https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-storage-and-interfaces.git
2. https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-htsget 
3. https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-rems
4. https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-containerized-computation
5. https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-beacon2-ri-api.git 

# User facing services
The user facing services are the following:
1. Download
2. Htsget
3. REMS
4. Login/Auth
5. Inbox
6. Beacon
7. Public key endpoint

> The ports for these services should bee open, in order to be able to access them from outside the VM. The ports in our case are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ports for these services should be open, in order to be able to access them from outside the VM. The ports in our case are:
```

1. Download: 8443
2. Htsget: 8081
3. REMS: 3000
4. Login/Auth: 8080
5. Inbox: 8000
6. Beacon: 8085 TODO: Change to the actual port

> 7. Public key endpoint: stored at an S3 bucket in our case

Reviewer 3: This is not a port, right?

Author: what do you mean? the public key or?

Reviewer 3: The public key is not a port is it is categorized under the section `ports` as 7th point.

Author: Sure, but that's the case for us. I am not sure it will be for the other nodes and they need to have an open port for users to be able to download the key

Reviewer 3: OK

# LS AAI registration

> In order to have access to the LS AAI and enable for the users to login with their home organization credentials, the service needs to be registered with LS AAI. The registration process is described [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/17pNXM_psYOP5rWF302ObAJACsfYnEWhjvxAHzcjvfIE/edit)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to gain access to the LS AAI and enable the users to login with their home organization credentials, the service needs to be registered with LS AAI. The registration process is described [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/17pNXM_psYOP5rWF302ObAJACsfYnEWhjvxAHzcjvfIE/edit)
```

> In order to have access to the LS AAI and enable for the users to login with their home organization credentials, the service needs to be registered with LS AAI. The registration process is described [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/17pNXM_psYOP5rWF302ObAJACsfYnEWhjvxAHzcjvfIE/edit)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to have access to the LS AAI and enable for the users to login with their home organization credentials, the Auth service needs to be registered with LS AAI. The registration process is described [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/17pNXM_psYOP5rWF302ObAJACsfYnEWhjvxAHzcjvfIE/edit)
```

> The details for the LS AAI configuration are described [here](https://lifescience-ri.eu/ls-login.html). For more information contact `Dominic František Bučík` on GDI slack.

Reviewer: No need to make name monospace(?)

```suggestion
The details for the LS AAI configuration are described [here](https://lifescience-ri.eu/ls-login.html). For more information contact Dominic František Bučík on GDI slack.
```

## Create certificates for all these services

> The user facing services are running with TLS encryption. To create the certificates, we used certbot. The certificates are stored in a docker volume, which is mounted in all the containers.

Reviewer: Capitalise proper names.

```suggestion
The user facing services are running with TLS encryption. To create the certificates, we used Certbot. The certificates are stored in a Docker volume, which is mounted in all the containers.
```

> Clone the storage-and-interfaces repo using the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clone the `storage-and-interfaces` repository using the following command:
```

```bash

> $ git clone https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-storage-and-interfaces.git

Reviewer: No need to show the prompt.

```suggestion
git clone https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-storage-and-interfaces.git
```

```

Generate a certificate for all external facing services with a command similar to this (be sure to change the email and the domains):
```bash

> $ /usr/bin/certbot certonly --standalone \

Reviewer: No need for the prompt, and no need for full path to `certbot` if it's in a standard path like `/usr/bin`.

```suggestion
certbot certonly --standalone \
```

        --noninteractive \
        --agree-tos \ 
        --preferred-challenges http \
        --email sda-ops@nbis.se \
        -d htsget.gdi.nbis.se \
        -d login.gdi.nbis.se \
        -d download.gdi.nbis.se \
        -d beacon.gdi.nbis.se \
        -d inbox.gdi.nbis.se \
        -d rems.gdi.nbis.se --expand
```

> To renew the certificates and copy them to the docker volume, run the following command or add it to the certbot crontab job, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To renew the certificates and copy them to the Docker volume, run the following command or add it to the Certbot cron job, for example:
```

> ```bash

Reviewer: Use "none" for crontab schedules.

```suggestion
```none
```

1 2	1 * * root /usr/bin/certbot renew --deploy-hook /home/ubuntu/starter-kit-storage-and-interfaces/scripts/cert-deploy --quiet --no-self-upgrade
```

## Deploying storage and interfaces

> Now that the storage and interfaces repo is cloned, start by editing the `config/config.yml` file (a sample can be found under `storage-and-interfaces/config` in this repo) and add the certificates you generated to the “app” entry (which is the download service), like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that the storage and interfaces repository is cloned, start by editing the `config/config.yml` file (a sample can be found under `storage-and-interfaces/config` in this repository) and add the certificates you generated to the `app` entry (which is the download service), like:
```

```yaml
app: # this is for download
  host: "0.0.0.0"
  servercert: /shared/cert/fullchain.pem
  serverkey: /shared/cert/privkey.pem
  port: "8443"
```

> And to the s3inbox entry in the docker-compose.yml (a sample can be found under `storage-and-interfaces` in this repo) like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And to the `s3inbox` entry in the `docker-compose.yml` file (a sample can be found under `storage-and-interfaces` in this repository) like:
```

```yaml
s3inbox:
  environment:
    - SERVER_CERT=/shared/cert/fullchain.pem
    - SERVER_KEY=/shared/cert/privkey.pem
```

### Deploying auth
Auth is a service in the storage-and-interfaces compose file that enables the users to extract a token and an s3config file in order to download and upload data respectively. 

> In the docker-compose.yml, apart from the credentials of the LS AAI account (registered in earlier steps), you should also set the redirect URL, to something like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Auth is a service in the storage-and-interfaces Docker compose file that enables the users to extract a token and an s3config file in order to download and upload data, respectively. 
In the `docker-compose.yml` file, apart from the credentials of the LS AAI account (registered in earlier steps), you should also set the redirect URL, to something like:
```

```yaml
- ELIXIR_REDIRECTURL=https://login.gdi.nbis.se/elixir/login
```

### Storage

> The Swedish deployment is using an external S3 backend for storing the files. However, the docker compose file in storage-and-interfaces contains a minio instance, that can be used for archiving the data. In either case, set the credentials of the S3 backend in the `config/config.yaml` file, specifically the `S3AccessKey` and `S3SecretKey` values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Swedish deployment is using an external S3 backend for storing the files. However, the Docker compose file in storage-and-interfaces contains a Minio instance, that can be used for archiving the data. In either case, set the credentials of the S3 backend in the `config/config.yaml` file, specifically the `S3AccessKey` and `S3SecretKey` values.
```

### Update the issuer configuration

> Under `config/iss.json` there exists a file that defines the issuer that will be used from the download service. Change this to point to your rems instance, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under `config/iss.json` there exists a file that defines the issuer that will be used from the download service. Change this to point to your REMS instance, for example:
```

Also, what is meant by "Under `config/iss.json`"?  Do you possibly mean "In" rather than "Under"?

```json
{
    "iss": "https://rems.gdi.nbis.se/",
    "jku": "https://rems.gdi.nbis.se/api/jwk"
}
```

## Deploying htsget

> To get the htsget working with tls, move to the start-kit-htsget folder and edit the `htsget-config/config.json` file (a sample can be found under `htsget/config-htsget/` in this repo) and change the location of serverCert and serverKey to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get the `htsget` working with TLS, move to the `start-kit-htsget` directory and edit the `htsget-config/config.json` file (a sample can be found under `htsget/config-htsget/` in this repository) and change the location of `serverCert` and `serverKey` to:
```

```json
"serverCert": "/shared/cert/fullchain.pem",
"serverKey": "/shared/cert/privkey.pem"
```

And change the first source to point to the download endpoint. For example:
```json
{
    "pattern": "^s3/(?P<accession>.*)$",
    "path": "https://download.gdi.nbis.se/s3/{accession}"
},
```

> Then change the port where the service is mapped to the port you want to expose (currently set to 8081) by changing the `docker-compose-htsget.yml` file (a sample can be found under `htsget` in this repo) as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then change the port where the service is mapped to the port you want to expose (currently set to 8081) by changing the `docker-compose-htsget.yml` file (a sample can be found under `htsget` in this repository) as follows:
```

```yaml
services:
  server:
    ports:
      - 8081:3000
```

## Deploying REMS

> Edit the configuration file `config.edn`, add/modify values for public_url, database_url, oidc-metadata-url, oidc-scopes, oidc-client-id and oidc-client-secret

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edit the configuration file `config.edn`, add/modify values for `public_url`, `database_url`, `oidc-metadata-url`, `oidc-scopes`, `oidc-client-id` and `oidc-client-secret`
```

```edn
:public-url "https://rems.gdi.nbis.se/"
:database-url "postgresql://db:5432/rems?user=<REMS_DATABASE_USER>&password=<REMS_DATABASE_PASSWORD>"
:oidc-metadata-url "https://login.elixir-czech.org/oidc/.well-known/openid-configuration"
:oidc-scopes "openid profile email ga4gh_passport_v1"
```

> The values for oidc-client-id and oidc-client-secret can be obtained from spreg, in our case from `https://services.aai.lifescience-ri.eu/spreg/auth/facilities/detail/<YOUR_PROJECT_ID>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The values for `oidc-client-id` and `oidc-client-secret` can be obtained from `spreg`, in our case from `https://services.aai.lifescience-ri.eu/spreg/auth/facilities/detail/<YOUR_PROJECT_ID>`
```

> To configure TLS for REMS, one needs to add three parameters, namely ssl-port, ssl-keystore and ssl-keystore-password. The value of ssl-port should be set as 3000, consequently, port for non TLS can be modified to e.g. 3001.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure TLS for REMS, one needs to add three parameters, namely `ssl-port`, `ssl-keystore` and `ssl-keystore-password`. The value of `ssl-port` should be set as 3000, consequently, port for non-TLS can be modified to e.g. 3001.
```

> The keystore file can be converted from certificate files generated by CertBot by the following commands, assuming the public key file is `./certs/cert.pem`, the private key file is `./certs/privkey.pem` and the CA file is `./certs/fullchain.pem`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The keystore file can be converted from certificate files generated by Certbot by the following commands, assuming the public key file is `./certs/cert.pem`, the private key file is `./certs/privkey.pem` and the CA file is `./certs/fullchain.pem`.
```

> From outside the container (on the VM) and under the root folder of the repo run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From outside of the container (on the VM) and under the root folder of the repository, run
```

```bash
openssl pkcs12 -export \
    -in ./certs/fullchain.pem \
    -inkey ./certs/privkey.pem \
    -out ./certs/rems.gdi.nbis.se.p12 \
    -name rems.gdi.nbis.se \
    -password "<CERTIFICATE_PASSWORD>"
```

> Then run the following command from inside the rems container:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then run the following command from inside the REMS container:
```

```bash
keytool -importkeystore \
    -deststorepass <CERTIFICATE_PASSWORD> \
    -destkeypass <CERTIFICATE_PASSWORD> \
    -deststoretype pkcs12 \
    -srckeystore rems.gdi.nbis.se.p12 \
    -srcstoretype PKCS12 \
    -srcstorepass <CERTIFICATE_PASSWORD> \
    -destkeystore rems.gdi.nbis.se.keystore \
    -alias rems.gdi.nbis.se
```

> For the docker setup, add/modify ports of the service “app”

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the Docker setup, add/modify ports of the service `app`
```

```yaml
ports:
- "3000:3000"
- "3001:3001"
```

> Modify ports of the service “db” to 5433 to avoid conflict with another db container 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modify ports of the service `db` to 5433 to avoid conflict with any other database container 
```

```yaml
ports:
- "127.0.0.1:5433:5432"
```

> Add the volume starter-kit-storage-and-interfaces_shared

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the volume `starter-kit-storage-and-interfaces_shared`
```

```yaml
starter-kit-storage-and-interfaces_shared:
  external: true
```

> The `private-key.jwk` created when deploying REMS does not contain the “kid” field, therefore (for now) that needs to be added manually, by copying the same value from the `public-key.jwk`. This might have been fixed on the key creation script, in later REMS versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `private-key.jwk` created when deploying REMS does not contain the `kid` field, therefore (for now) that needs to be added manually, by copying the same value from the `public-key.jwk`. This might have been fixed on the key creation script, in later REMS versions.
```

> The `private-key.jwk` created when deploying REMS does not contain the “kid” field, therefore (for now) that needs to be added manually, by copying the same value from the `public-key.jwk`. This might have been fixed on the key creation script, in later REMS versions.

Reviewer 2: It is not clear to me which key creation script is specifically referred to here. Is it in the REMS GDI repo or somewhere else?

### Create an administrator account
In order to use REMS you need to create an admin account. Details about that can be found [here](https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-rems#get-admin-access).

### Create the robot account
After deploying REMS, create a robot user account, that will be used for the connection with the LS AAI. Details can be found [here](https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-rems#create-a-robot-user-and-an-api-key)

### Connect REMS to LS AAI
After setting up the robot account, send the required information to the LS AAI people. The data includes:

> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

- jwks url: https://rems.gdi.nbis.se/api/jwk
- permissions api: https://rems.gdi.nbis.se/api/permissions/<lifescience_user_id>
- user: <ROBOT_USER_NAME>
- user api key: <taken_from_REMS_database>
```
* The `lifescience_user_id` is not a specific value. It will be used from the LS AAI when requesting permissions.

> * The user api key is created in the previous step. In order to extract it from the database, run 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The user API key is created in the previous step. In order to extract it from the database, run 
```

```bash
docker exec -it rems_db /bin/bash
psql -U rems rems -h localhost

> select * from api_key;

Reviewer: Combine.
```suggestion
docker exec -it rems_db psql -U rems -h localhost -c 'select * from api_key' rems
```

Or, with line break for readability,
```suggestion
docker exec -it rems_db \
    psql -U rems -h localhost -c 'select * from api_key' rems
```

```
and get the key created for the robot account.

If everything worked well, you should be able to see the visas created by REMS in the token provided by the LS AAI for a specific user.

### Using REMS
In order to use REMS and be able to apply for access, you need to follow the steps described [here](https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-rems#create-your-own-data). This guide assumes that there exists an organisation, workflow etc.

## Deploying Beacon2 (WIP)

TODO: This part is a work in progress and should probably be skipped for now

Clone the starter-kit-beacon2-ri-api repo using the following command:
```bash

> $ git clone https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-beacon2-ri-api.git

Reviewer: ```suggestion
git clone https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-beacon2-ri-api.git
```

```

Deployment instructions are available in the repo, at `https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-beacon2-ri-api/blob/master/deploy/README.md` 

There are some port collisions with storage-and-interfaces in this repo:

> ```bash

Reviewer: This seems to by text, not shell commands.

```suggestion
```none
```

9000 is used for beacon_training_ui
8081 is used for mongo-express
8000 is used for keycloak
```
In our case, changed these are:

> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```none
```

9000 → 9090
8081 → 8082
8000 → 8083
```

Start the deployment with: 
```bash
docker compose up --build -d
```

> Follow the instructions in the repo for loading the data, summarized:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the instructions in the repository for loading the data, summarized:
```

docker cp "$DATA_PATH/individuals.json" deploy-db-1:tmp/individuals.json
docker cp "$DATA_PATH/runs.json" deploy-db-1:tmp/runs.json
```
Then:
```bash
docker exec deploy-db-1 mongoimport --jsonArray --uri "mongodb://root:example@127.0.0.1:27017/beacon?authSource=admin" --file /tmp/datasets.json --collection datasets
docker exec deploy-db-1 mongoimport --jsonArray --uri "mongodb://root:example@127.0.0.1:27017/beacon?authSource=admin" --file /tmp/analyses.json --collection analyses
docker exec deploy-db-1 mongoimport --jsonArray --uri "mongodb://root:example@127.0.0.1:27017/beacon?authSource=admin" --file /tmp/biosamples.json --collection biosamples
docker exec deploy-db-1 mongoimport --jsonArray --uri "mongodb://root:example@127.0.0.1:27017/beacon?authSource=admin" --file /tmp/cohorts.json --collection cohorts
docker exec deploy-db-1 mongoimport --jsonArray --uri "mongodb://root:example@127.0.0.1:27017/beacon?authSource=admin" --file /tmp/genomicVariations.json --collection genomicVariations
docker exec deploy-db-1 mongoimport --jsonArray --uri "mongodb://root:example@127.0.0.1:27017/beacon?authSource=admin" --file /tmp/individuals.json --collection individuals

> docker exec deploy-db-1 mongoimport --jsonArray --uri "mongodb://root:example@127.0.0.1:27017/beacon?authSource=admin" --file /tmp/runs.json --collection runs

Reviewer: Reduce repetition.

```suggestion
for collection in datasets analyses biosamples cohorts genomiVariations individuals runs
do
    docker cp "./data/$collection.json" "deploy-db-1:/tmp/$collection.json"
    
    docker exec deploy-db-1 mongoimport --jsonArray \
        --uri 'mongodb://root:example@127.0.0.1:27017/beacon?authSource=admin' \
        --file "/tmp/$collection.json" --collection "$collection"
done
```

```

And finally
```bash
docker exec beacon python beacon/reindex.py
```
To create indexes for the database.

You then need to set up ontologies correctly with:
```bash
docker exec beacon python beacon/db/extract_filtering_terms.py
docker exec beacon python beacon/db/get_descendants.py
```

## Create endpoint for public crypt4gh key
Create a new bucket and upload the key to that bucket. Then change the key permissions to public:
```bash
s3cmd -c <s3config> mb s3://gdi-public
s3cmd -c <s3config> put c4gh.pub.pem s3://gdi-public/key/
s3cmd -c <s3config> setacl s3://gdi-public/key/c4gh.pub.pem --acl-public
```

If you are using the Swedish GDI implementation, the public key for the next step can be found under `https://s3.sto3.safedc.net/gdi-public/key/c4gh.pub.pem`

## Uploading data to the archive

From the VM where the storage-and-interfaces is deployed, extract the crypt4gh public key from the download container using:
```bash

> $ docker cp download:/shared/c4gh.pub.pem .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
docker cp download:/shared/c4gh.pub.pem .
```

```

Download the `c4gh.pub.pem` to the machine where the dataset exists.

Login to the auth endpoint (https://login.gdi.nbis.se) and download the s3config file containing the JWT token.
Download and extract the sda-cli
```bash
$ wget https://github.com/NBISweden/sda-cli/releases/download/v0.0.6/sda-cli_.0.0.6_Darwin_x86_64.tar.gz

> $ tar -xvzf sda-cli_.0.0.6_Darwin_x86_64.tar.gz

Reviewer: ```suggestion
wget https://github.com/NBISweden/sda-cli/releases/download/v0.0.6/sda-cli_.0.0.6_Darwin_x86_64.tar.gz
tar -xvzf sda-cli_.0.0.6_Darwin_x86_64.tar.gz
```

```

> Encrypt and upload the file using the sda-cli

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Encrypt and upload the file using `sda-cli`
```

This could obviously also be done using `sda-admin`,  and that might even be simpler?

```bash
$ ./sda-cli encrypt -key keys/c4gh.pub.pem <file_name>

> $ ./sda-cli upload -config s3cmd.conf <file_name>.c4gh (-targetDir <target_folder_location>)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
./sda-cli encrypt -key keys/c4gh.pub.pem <file_name>
./sda-cli upload -config s3cmd.conf <file_name>.c4gh (-targetDir <target_folder_location>)
```

```

> To start the ingestion, use the sda-admin tool from the VM where the storage-and-interfaces product is deployed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start the ingestion, use the `sda-admin` tool from the VM where the storage-and-interfaces product is deployed.
```

First, copy the `s3cmd.conf` file in the same folder as the `sda-admin` tool. Then check that the file uploaded earlier exists using
```bash

> $ ./sda-admin ingest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
./sda-admin ingest
```

```

> Then start the ingestion, create an accession id and finally map the file to a dataset using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then start the ingestion, create an accession ID and finally map the file to a dataset using
```

```bash
$ ./sda-admin ingest <file_name_with_path>
$ ./sda-admin accession <accession_id> <file_name_with_path>

> $ ./sda-admin dataset <dataset_id> <file_name_with_path>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
./sda-admin ingest <file_name_with_path>
./sda-admin accession <accession_id> <file_name_with_path>
./sda-admin dataset <dataset_id> <file_name_with_path>
```

```
For example:
```bash
$ ./sda-admin ingest dir180523/file180523.test.c4gh
$ ./sda-admin accession GDIF000000002 dir180523/file180523.test.c4gh

> $ ./sda-admin dataset GDID000000002  dir180523/file180523.test.c4gh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
./sda-admin ingest dir180523/file180523.test.c4gh
./sda-admin accession GDIF000000002 dir180523/file180523.test.c4gh
./sda-admin dataset GDID000000002  dir180523/file180523.test.c4gh
```

```

## Apply and get access to dataset
Login to REMS (deployed earlier), pick a dataset from the catalogue item list and apply for access. The handler then should approve the request and the user should now have the visas to access the files from the dataset.

## Get the files

### Get files with samtools
After getting the request for access approved, you should be able to download the files in the specified dataset. That can be achieved by:

> 1. Login to the auth service (deployed with storage-and-interface)

Reviewer 3: Given an example URL for the auth service, at least for our case?

2. Copy the access token
3. Store the token in a file and export it to the `HTS_AUTH_LOCATION` variable
```bash
export HTS_AUTH_LOCATION=token.txt
```
4. Check the files that exist in the specific dataset using
```bash

> curl --location 'https://<DOWNLOAD_SERVICE_URL>/metadata/datasets/<DATASET_URL>/files' \
> --header 'Authorization: Bearer <JWT_FROM_AUTH>'

Reviewer: Put the URL last.

```suggestion
curl --location \
    --header 'Authorization: Bearer <JWT_FROM_AUTH>' \
    'https://<DOWNLOAD_SERVICE_URL>/metadata/datasets/<DATASET_URL>/files'
```

```
e.g. for the Swedish case:
```bash

> curl --location 'https://download.gdi.nbis.se/metadata/datasets/https://gdi.nbis.se/datasets/gdi000000003/files' \
> --header 'Authorization: Bearer <JWT_FROM_AUTH>'

Reviewer: Similar to previous.

```suggestion
curl --location \
    --header 'Authorization: Bearer <JWT_FROM_AUTH>' \
    'https://download.gdi.nbis.se/metadata/datasets/https://gdi.nbis.se/datasets/gdi000000003/files'
```

# Deployment of GDI starter kit

This repository is a collection of scripts and documentation produced during the deployment of the GDI starter kit in the Swedish node. However, it shouldn't be used as a standalone guide, and it probably lacks some steps not documented during the deployment.

The deployment described here was done in one VM (virtual machine) and the services were deployed in docker containers. The VM is running behind an ha-proxy, which was used to route the traffic to the different services. The VM is running Ubuntu 22.04 LTS.

## Repos in the deployment

The repositories used in the deployment are the following:
1. https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-storage-and-interfaces.git
2. https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-htsget 
3. https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-rems
4. https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-containerized-computation
5. https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-beacon2-ri-api.git 

# User facing services
The user facing services are the following:
1. Download
2. Htsget
3. REMS
4. Login/Auth
5. Inbox
6. Beacon
7. Public key endpoint

> The ports for these services should be open, in order to be able to access them from outside the VM. The ports in our case are:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ports for these services should be open, in order to be able to access them from outside the VM. The ports in Swedish case are:
```

Reviewer 3: For consistence, better to use Swedish case in stead of our case throughout the document

1. Download: 8443
2. Htsget: 8081
3. REMS: 3000
4. Login/Auth: 8080
5. Inbox: 8000
6. Beacon: 8085 TODO: Change to the actual port

> 7. Public key endpoint: stored at an S3 bucket in our case

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
7. Public key endpoint: stored at an S3 bucket in Swedish case
```

```json
"serverCert": "/shared/cert/fullchain.pem",
"serverKey": "/shared/cert/privkey.pem"
```

And change the first source to point to the download endpoint. For example:
```json
{
    "pattern": "^s3/(?P<accession>.*)$",
    "path": "https://download.gdi.nbis.se/s3/{accession}"
},
```

Then change the port where the service is mapped to the port you want to expose (currently set to 8081) by changing the `docker-compose-htsget.yml` file (a sample can be found under `htsget` in this repository) as follows:
```yaml
services:
  server:
    ports:
      - 8081:3000
```

## Deploying REMS
Edit the configuration file `config.edn`, add/modify values for `public_url`, `database_url`, `oidc-metadata-url`, `oidc-scopes`, `oidc-client-id` and `oidc-client-secret`
```edn
:public-url "https://rems.gdi.nbis.se/"
:database-url "postgresql://db:5432/rems?user=<REMS_DATABASE_USER>&password=<REMS_DATABASE_PASSWORD>"
:oidc-metadata-url "https://login.elixir-czech.org/oidc/.well-known/openid-configuration"
:oidc-scopes "openid profile email ga4gh_passport_v1"
```

> The values for `oidc-client-id` and `oidc-client-secret` can be obtained from `spreg`, in our case from `https://services.aai.lifescience-ri.eu/spreg/auth/facilities/detail/<YOUR_PROJECT_ID>`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The values for `oidc-client-id` and `oidc-client-secret` can be obtained from `spreg`, in Swedish case from `https://services.aai.lifescience-ri.eu/spreg/auth/facilities/detail/<YOUR_PROJECT_ID>`
```

```bash
docker exec -it rems_db psql -U rems -h localhost -c 'select * from api_key' rems
```
and get the key created for the robot account.

If everything worked well, you should be able to see the visas created by REMS in the token provided by the LS AAI for a specific user.

### Using REMS
In order to use REMS and be able to apply for access, you need to follow the steps described [here](https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-rems#create-your-own-data). This guide assumes that there exists an organisation, workflow etc.

## Deploying Beacon2 (WIP)

TODO: This part is a work in progress and should probably be skipped for now

Clone the starter-kit-beacon2-ri-api repo using the following command:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-beacon2-ri-api.git
```

Deployment instructions are available in the repo, at `https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/starter-kit-beacon2-ri-api/blob/master/deploy/README.md` 

There are some port collisions with storage-and-interfaces in this repo:
```none
9000 is used for beacon_training_ui
8081 is used for mongo-express
8000 is used for keycloak
```

> In our case, changed these are:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Swedish case, changes are:
```

```none
9000 → 9090
8081 → 8082
8000 → 8083
```

Start the deployment with: 
```bash
docker compose up --build -d
```

Follow the instructions in the repository for loading the data, summarized:
```bash
for collection in datasets analyses biosamples cohorts genomiVariations individuals runs
do
    docker cp "./data/$collection.json" "deploy-db-1:/tmp/$collection.json"
    
    docker exec deploy-db-1 mongoimport --jsonArray \
        --uri 'mongodb://root:example@127.0.0.1:27017/beacon?authSource=admin' \
        --file "/tmp/$collection.json" --collection "$collection"
done
```

And finally
```bash
docker exec beacon python beacon/reindex.py
```
To create indexes for the database.

You then need to set up ontologies correctly with:
```bash
docker exec beacon python beacon/db/extract_filtering_terms.py
docker exec beacon python beacon/db/get_descendants.py
```

## Create endpoint for public crypt4gh key
Create a new bucket and upload the key to that bucket. Then change the key permissions to public:
```bash
s3cmd -c <s3config> mb s3://gdi-public
s3cmd -c <s3config> put c4gh.pub.pem s3://gdi-public/key/
s3cmd -c <s3config> setacl s3://gdi-public/key/c4gh.pub.pem --acl-public
```

> If you are using the Swedish GDI implementation, the public key for the next step can be found under `https://s3.sto3.safedc.net/gdi-public/key/c4gh.pub.pem`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you are using the Swedish GDI implementation, the public key for the previous step can be found under `https://s3.sto3.safedc.net/gdi-public/key/c4gh.pub.pem`
```

Reviewer 3: Usage of the key `c4gh.pub.pem` appears before this sentence, it is a bit weird to mention it after that and with `next step`.

Author: This is actually used in the next step. The previous is only a sample for uploading the key, but doesn't have to be this name or key

Reviewer 3: A bit confusing, maybe use something like `<PUB-KEY>` instead of `c4gh.pub.pem` in the s3cmd commands?

Author: Not sure I understand? Use what instead of `c4gh.pub.pem`?

Reviewer 3: sorry, edited. Markdown hide text inside `<>`

```

## Deploying storage and interfaces
Now that the storage and interfaces repository is cloned, start by editing the `config/config.yml` file (a sample can be found under `storage-and-interfaces/config` in this repository) and add the certificates you generated to the `app` entry (which is the download service), like:
```yaml
app: # this is for download
  host: "0.0.0.0"
  servercert: /shared/cert/fullchain.pem
  serverkey: /shared/cert/privkey.pem
  port: "8443"
```

And to the `s3inbox` entry in the `docker-compose.yml` file (a sample can be found under `storage-and-interfaces` in this repository) like:
```yaml
s3inbox:
  environment:
    - SERVER_CERT=/shared/cert/fullchain.pem
    - SERVER_KEY=/shared/cert/privkey.pem
```

### Deploying auth
Auth is a service in the storage-and-interfaces Docker compose file that enables the users to extract a token and an s3config file in order to download and upload data, respectively. 
In the `docker-compose.yml` file, apart from the credentials of the LS AAI account (registered in earlier steps), you should also set the redirect URL, to something like:
```yaml

> - ELIXIR_REDIRECTURL=https://login.gdi.nbis.se/elixir/login

Reviewer 4: Maybe here mention as well the `ELIXIR_ID=<LS_AAI_CLIENT_ID>` and the `ELIXIR_SECRET=<LS_AAI_CLIENT_SECRET>` and how you obtain them? In general to move this part of REMS section here:

> The values for `oidc-client-id` and `oidc-client-secret` can be obtained from `spreg`, in the Swedish case from `https://services.aai.lifescience-ri.eu/spreg/auth/facilities/detail/<YOUR_PROJECT_ID>`

### Update the issuer configuration
In `config/iss.json` there exists a file that defines the issuer that will be used from the download service. Change this to point to your REMS instance, for example:
```json
{
    "iss": "https://rems.gdi.nbis.se/",
    "jku": "https://rems.gdi.nbis.se/api/jwk"
}
```

## Deploying htsget
To get the `htsget` working with TLS, move to the `start-kit-htsget` directory and edit the `htsget-config/config.json` file (a sample can be found under `htsget/config-htsget/` in this repository) and change the location of `serverCert` and `serverKey` to:
```json
"serverCert": "/shared/cert/fullchain.pem",
"serverKey": "/shared/cert/privkey.pem"
```

And change the first source to point to the download endpoint. For example:
```json
{
    "pattern": "^s3/(?P<accession>.*)$",
    "path": "https://download.gdi.nbis.se/s3/{accession}"
},
```

Then change the port where the service is mapped to the port you want to expose (currently set to 8081) by changing the `docker-compose-htsget.yml` file (a sample can be found under `htsget` in this repository) as follows:
```yaml
services:
  server:
    ports:
      - 8081:3000
```

> ## Deploying REMS

Reviewer 4: Maybe mention here that the REMS should be also registered in the LS AAI? Because in the section of the LS AAI above it mentions only that Auth service needs to be registered with it. 
Something like: "REMS needs to be registered with the LS AAI as well, similar to the Auth service. Both of them can be under the same service since you are allowed to have multiple Redirect URIs (one for the Auth and one for the REMS).
This information can also exist in the LS AAI registration section instead of here.

Edit the configuration file `config.edn`, add/modify values for `public_url`, `database_url`, `oidc-metadata-url`, `oidc-scopes`, `oidc-client-id` and `oidc-client-secret`
```edn
:public-url "https://rems.gdi.nbis.se/"
:database-url "postgresql://db:5432/rems?user=<REMS_DATABASE_USER>&password=<REMS_DATABASE_PASSWORD>"
:oidc-metadata-url "https://login.elixir-czech.org/oidc/.well-known/openid-configuration"
:oidc-scopes "openid profile email ga4gh_passport_v1"
```

> The values for `oidc-client-id` and `oidc-client-secret` can be obtained from `spreg`, in the Swedish case from `https://services.aai.lifescience-ri.eu/spreg/auth/facilities/detail/<YOUR_PROJECT_ID>`

Reviewer 4: If the above information will be moved in the Auth section then just say here that how you get the oidc client id and secret is mentioned above in the Auth section. 
Or that are the same with the Auth service since both will be under the same LS AAI service.
